within every single one of us there are
approximately 3.16 billion base pairs of
DNA which contain not only our genetic
information but also hold our deepest
biological Secrets including the darkest
most Twisted ones at least that's the
case according to a few studies which
have apparently found evidence that not
so long ago much of the known world was
Rife and violent bloody conflict that
was so brutal that his ramifications
have lasted until today it is completely
unknown to most and yet in some ways
represents the first global conflict
Humanity has ever experienced as it
spanned across much of the inhabited
world making violence near Universal and
Escape impossible it's not every day
that we find evidence for such a
destructive conflict let alone through
our very own DNA but that's supposedly
what happened after researchers analyzed
the genomes of modern populations
finding evidence of a very distinct
genetic bottleneck now bottlenecks in
general is what occurs when a population
experien a drastic drop in numbers
resulting in lower genetic diversity and
that is honestly somewhat common in
nature with even humans having endured
more than one with a particularly deadly
and famous One having took place
approximately 900,000 years ago due to
Mother Nature Shenanigans but the one
I'm talking about and that these
researchers identified was much more
recent and seemingly our own fault to be
exact a team took a look at chromosome
sequences in contemporary humans and
noticed evidence of a massive drop in in
genetic diversity only a few thousand
years ago during the late Neolithic
period in the old world I.E Europe Asia
Middle East Etc and suggesting that a
lot of people died or disappeared
relatively quickly now anything that
heavily impacts the population could
have been considered an answer to this
mysterious die off yet what was so odd
is that the bottleneck was only really
seen in why chromosome diversity which
is unique to males and passed on from
father to son while in the mitochondrial
DNA which has passed down through
females researchers found no matching
drop in diversity in other words
something had happened which clearly
affected a lot of men but not nearly as
many women leading to the researcher's
idea that unprecedented violence may
have had been the explanation because if
the perpetrator was a volcanic eruption
severe weather or some other form of
Mother Nature you'd expect the drop in
genetic diversity to be more or less
equal between genders not just in one
and really a drop is not the best word
to describe what happened to the men as
a more appropriate word would be
decimated with the scientists estimating
that this event was so horrific that by
the time it subsided the effective male
population in Africa Europe Asia and the
Middle East had been reduced by up to
95% meaning that theoretically only one
in 20 men survive this purge with women
possibly outnumbering men 17 to1 no
conflict in recorded history comes even
close to this kind of lethality by a
percentage not even World War I or World
War II and if you wanted to recreate
such a brutal conflict today then
there'd have to be a loss of
approximately 3.9 billion men leaving
only about 200 million standing
naturally when someone claims that our
DNA is proof that a terrible conflict
happened you'd expect to find at least a
couple of bodies lying around that we
could point to as hard evidence and as
it turns out there are lots and lots and
lots of them in fact it's actually hard
to miss them and we discovered well over
250 late Neolithic dated sites where
violent deaths have occurred and that's
just in Europe alone and even in general
Neolithic humans are notorious for being
found in Grim conditions in containing
unparalleled amounts of bodily harm
especially when compared to earlier or
later humans with one analysis of more
than 2,300 early farmers finding that
over 10% of the men and women displayed
injuries reflecting weapons likely from
raiding parties or competition that
attacked for their crops and livestock
another analysis of three 138
individuals in Spain found that 23%
showed signs of aggressive damage with
adult and Adolescent males especially
being heavily impacted making up 97% of
the unhealed individuals and 81% of
those that showed healed trauma
suggesting that it was very common to
experience more than one violent
encounter in a lifetime and obviously
these numbers are pretty darn high but
they're not the 95% inferred in the
study yet research points out that in
many cases violent attacks don't
actually leave marks in the bones with
only 15% of fatal melee attacks the
sharp weapons leaving any sort of bone
lesions behind and you also have to take
into account infections disease and
other indirect modes of death that are
associated with conflict now obviously
these weren't the first people to be
found murdered by their own but their
frequency was no doubt extreme and
scientists noted two things that became
exceptionally common during this period
battles and indiscriminate massacres
with multiple SIDS of brutality being
known of one of the most gruesome is the
tal Death Pit located in Germany which
is dated to about 5,000 BC here
scientists un Earth the remains of at
least 34 individuals who had been
brutally slain and what's crazy is that
none of the skeletons bore any kind of
defensive injuries which implies that
they were fleeing and not fighting the
attacking party and across the board The
Killing blows could all be placed in
just three categories those that were
made by a sharp side of an adzy likee
tool those by the blunt side and finally
the ones killed by arrows which only
accounted for three of the 34 victims
analysis on the skulls also showed that
Warriors back then often aimed for the
head with all but four of the skeletons
having lethal cranial injuries sometimes
on top of already deadly wounds and
among the dead 16 had been children nine
of them adult men and seven being older
females while younger women were
noticeably absent a popular theme
amongst Neolithic Massacre sites
suggesting that they were viewed as
valuable and likely as a trophy being
kidnapped by the victors
this particular attack took place within
a settlement to possessed fortifications
like Palisades which only further proves
that back then there was a strong need
to wall yourself off from other humans
and sure enough other Massacre sites
that took place in settlements also had
fortifications like the massacre of
schletz which likely took place in 5000
BC as well occurring not so far away in
Austria and this one was far deadlier
with 200 victims being known of they
were carelessly dumped in a mass grave
after a raid on a settlement like
talheim there was again a noticeable
lack of dead women and lots of dead men
but this Slaughter did differ in some
ways first off on top of presumably
kidnapping adult women they also might
have captured pre-teens and young
teenagers as they too were noticeably
few among the dead and another Grim
difference was that in this attack many
of the Dead were found without their
arms and legs while severed skulls were
located separately evidence of potential
torture and
dismemberment this could have also been
a tradition for the attacking party and
showcase that different combatants had
varying rituals for example in Asia head
hunting was particularly common and
another poignant case that further
demonstrates this happens to be the
largest known prehistoric Mass grave
herxheim in Germany and it occurred
between 5,300 and 4,950 BC but instead
of a ravaged settlement archaeologists
actually believe they found a community
that were the ravagers having created at
least 80 pits right outside their 15
acre large Village that were essentially
filled to the brim with victims which so
far is estimated to have exceeded 1,000
individuals possibly up to 1500 and
ranged in age from newborns to elders
and if we account for the population
difference between then and now it would
almost be like a city building a mass
grave with over 800,000 corpses right
outside their City walls nearly each one
was processed in a similar way with a
native population dismembering and
breaking bones while also cleaving their
skulls down the middle in fact so many
skulls were cut and seemingly def
fleshed that a researchers reckon that
this community were skull cultists that
used the heads in some ritual and most
likely ate pieces of them as well with
the brain being an especially prized
part considering its fatty content there
were also signs the tongues were often
removed from the dead and that the bones
were crushed for easy marrow extraction
and to sprinkle just a bit more
queasiness into this scientists further
realized that there were less spongy
bone elements than there should have
been and that certain bones like the
metapodials and hand falles showed
preferential biting in other words these
guys had their favorite parts of the
body to munch on plus many of the bodies
were cooked with some even showing signs
of having been spit roasted and then
when it was all said and done bones were
processed into cups other items or
turned into decorations as some were
found near were on spikes where the
entrance of the settlement was situated
suffice to say this was just about the
worst group you could get caught by but
avoiding them might have been harder
than you would think because despite the
lack of Transportation back then they
still managed to wage war on a large
scale with many of their victims having
come from vastly different cultures some
of which were only found 300 M or 482 km
away the dead also ranged in lifestyle
with some having Isotopes demonstrating
that they were hunter gatherers While
others have been farmers and then you
also had victims that came from up in
the mountains and those from the
lowlands which all points to the idea
that herim's natives were horrifically
bloodthirsty people who managed to carry
out successful raids that required not
only tactics but a certain level of
logistics and not to mention that while
their settlement was large by a
Neolithic standard it was still
significantly smaller than a thousand
and when I say a thousand I mean less
than 50 people so impressive in a very
dark way
that being said there are still some
Mysteries regarding this place like who
exactly were the dead captives of War
slaves or were some just unlucky
Travelers that got too close also no one
is really sure what happened to the
natives of herxheim with some test
suggesting that the settlement was
abandoned soon after the massacres took
place with a maximum settlement time of
50 years following the burials leading
people to wonder if another group came
seeking retribution so obviously it's
hard to argue against her's time as
being the most gruesome site we know of
but such weird specific brutality was
not isolated to just this case and many
more instances are known of Warriors
that collected heads you've got it
groups that systematically broke and
removed shins yep there was that too
xenophobic groups that hunted down and
mutilated newcomers boom done and then
finally you even had Fighters that
buried people alive because apparently
that was a thing as well in addition to
a diverse range of brutality
there was also a lot of diversity when
it came to the weapons themselves and
many kinds of blunt and sharp weapons
were used in battles such as adses
Spears bows and arrows axes clubs knives
scrapers sick and hose Hammers and the
list goes on and unfortunately for
combatants the level of armor back then
did not match the innovativeness of
their weapons with no standard
protection being known of and Fighters
likely didn't wear much besides animal
skin woven cloth imp plant material this
all made living exceptionally difficult
for anyone but especially for men
capable of fighting and simply growing
up was an accomplishment with a level of
violence resulting in a measly lifespan
of between 20 and 33 years old and thus
tying it for first place for the time
when modern humans died the youngest and
this is even accounting for infam
Morality as even if you made it to say
15 you'd still be expected to not make
it past 33 and so with all this
nightmare fuel considered it really just
leads to one simple question which is
what the hell was going on why was
everyone seemingly in a Non-Stop fight
with everyone else and sadly there isn't
one single clear answer to this but
there are a few different ideas and
ironically one of the top hypotheses
pins it off as humans flying too close
to the Sun to be exact not so long
before the violence kicked off Humanity
entered the Neolithic Revolution also
known as the first Agricultural
Revolution this period in history saw
many human cultures transition from
hunter gatherers to settlers and Farmers
this allowed for a boost in population
and the ability to establish
full-fledged settlements which in turn
led to progress in other areas as well
and this sounds great on paper but this
success also meant that humans could now
better organize large battle worthy
groups courtesy of said settlements and
had access to a wider range of weapons
than ever before additionally this shift
provided humans with new reasons to kill
that didn't really exist beforehand as
they now knew that settlements and Farms
equal guaranteed loot food and wom all
in one place furthermore by proximity
alone settlements might have been viewed
as hostile by others and potentially as
existential threats leading to the
notion that all neighbors are bad news
and had to go another more specific idea
that tries to answer how the white
chromosome in particular was so
obliterated Beyond just the violence
states that as the Revolution was
underway societal structures reorganized
with more and more people forming
patrilineal kin groups perhaps because
trust was a rare commodity and it was
easier to rely on those you were related
to and this resulted in unrestricted
movement for women but very much
restricted for men in other words no
Outsiders allowed if you were a guy this
would have made the Y chromosome very
vulnerable and explains why it was so
affected when these Clans waged war
against one another and ultimately
leading to the genetic bottleneck being
very much one-sided but like many ideas
there are those that disagree with this
hypothesis and instead actually propose
a peaceful explanation to this now
obviously as the abundance of skeletons
show violence was quite prevalent at the
time but in terms of the genetic
bottleneck one team of scientist thinks
the patrilineal Clans may have split up
often through a peaceful process called
lineal fision since these new clans were
made up of closely related males their
why chromosome lineages became more
vulnerable to disappearing over time
especially due to environmental
hardships this led to a gradual drop in
wi chromosome diversity as some male
lineages were very successful in
surviving and others slowly faded away
this was only further compounded by
reproductive Fitness where some groups
were much more successful which led to
more growing and splitting only
reinforcing their dominance While others
just couldn't keep up and eventually
vanished of course there is then the
possibility that actually both of these
ideas were on the right track with
peaceful and violent factors having
worked together to bring the effect
effective male population way down
whatever the case there's certainly no
denying that something happened and to
this day the legacy of this bottleneck
remains with certain populations still
not being at the same diversity as pre-
bottleneck levels and if this had never
happened it's fair to say that things
would be quite different still our
genetics overall have mostly recovered
and we don't kill everyone else on site
so at least there's that improvement
though it does lead to a second question
which is how did all this potential
bloodshed end well it didn't at least
not in an absolute sense because over
time from a pure numbers Point more
people did end up dying in Wars
especially thanks to new technology it
just so happens that we grew faster than
we died so things got relatively better
then sometime later as more complex
societies were created and trade and
diplomacy arose things cooled off
however when you look at the last 600
years you can see that this cooling off
was only very recently as it was only
the last 100 or so that we really
started to turn a new leaf with the
amount of conflicts starting each year
being on a mostly downward spiral since
World War I and while it may be hard to
believe these days we do live in an
extremely peaceful world compared to the
one they used to be and this is of
course reflected in our very long
lifespans which is over three times that
of the Neolithic ones and while we
certainly do have our very own problems
I for one am glad I don't have to worry
about skull Cults and shint takers
anymore at least for the for the most
part thanks for watching and until next
time onx Zoo